1
FREE AND EASY WANDERING
In the northern darkness there is a fish and his name is
Kun.1 The Kun is so huge I don’t know how many thousand
li he measures. He changes and becomes a bird whose
name is Peng. The back of the Peng measures I don’t know
how many thousand li across, and when he rises up and flies
off, his wings are like clouds all over the sky. When the sea
begins to move,2 this bird sets off for the southern
darkness, which is the Lake of Heaven.
The Universal Harmony3 records various wonders, and
it says: “When the Peng journeys to the southern darkness,
the waters are roiled for three thousand li. He beats the
whirlwind and rises ninety thousand li, setting off on the
sixth-month gale.” Wavering heat, bits of dust, living things
blown about by the wind—the sky looks very blue. Is that
its real color, or is it because it is so far away and has no
end? When the bird looks down, all he sees is blue, too.
If water is not piled up deep enough, it won’t have the
strength to bear up a big boat. Pour a cup of water into a
hollow in the floor, and bits of trash will sail on it like
boats. But set the cup there, and it will stick fast, for the
water is too shallow and the boat too large. If wind is not
piled up deep enough, it won’t have the strength to bear up
great wings. Therefore when the Peng rises ninety thousand
li, he must have the wind under him like that. Only then can
he mount on the back of the wind, shoulder the blue sky,
and nothing can hinder or block him. Only then can he set
his eyes to the south.
The cicada and the little dove laugh at this, saying,
“When we make an effort and fly up, we can get as far as
the elm or the sapanwood tree, but sometimes we don’t
make it and just fall down on the ground. Now how is
anyone going to go ninety thousand li to the south!”
If you go off to the green woods nearby, you can take
along food for three meals and come back with your
stomach as full as ever. If you are going a hundred li, you
must grind your grain the night before; and if you are going
a thousand li, you must start getting the provisions together
three months in advance. What do these two creatures
understand? Little understanding cannot come up to great
understanding; the short-lived cannot come up to the longlived.
How do I know this is so? The morning mushroom
knows nothing of twilight and dawn; the summer cicada
knows nothing of spring and autumn. They are the shortlived. South of Chu there is a caterpillar that counts five
hundred years as one spring and five hundred years as one
autumn. Long, long ago there was a great rose of Sharon
that counted eight thousand years as one spring and eight
thousand years as one autumn. They are the long-lived. Yet
Pengzu
4 alone is famous today for having lived a long time,
and everybody tries to ape him. Isn’t it pitiful!
Among the questions of Tang to Qi we find the same
thing.5 In the bald and barren north, there is a dark sea, the
Lake of Heaven. In it is a fish that is several thousand li
across, and no one knows how long. His name is Kun.
There is also a bird there, named Peng, with a back like
Mount Tai and wings like clouds filling the sky. He beats
the whirlwind, leaps into the air, and rises up ninety
thousand li, cutting through the clouds and mist,
shouldering the blue sky, and then he turns his eyes south
and prepares to journey to the southern darkness.
The little quail laughs at him, saying, “Where does he
think he’s going? I give a great leap and fly up, but I never
get more than ten or twelve yards before I come down
fluttering among the weeds and brambles. And that’s the
best kind of flying, anyway! Where does he think he’s
going?” Such is the difference between big and little.
Therefore a man who has wisdom enough to fill one
office effectively, good conduct enough to impress one
community, virtue enough to please one ruler, or talent
enough to be called into service in one state, has the same
kind of self-pride as these little creatures. Song Rongzi6
would certainly burst out laughing at such a man. The whole
world could praise Song Rongzi and it wouldn’t make him
exert himself; the whole world could condemn him and it
wouldn’t make him mope. He drew a clear line between the
internal and the external and recognized the boundaries of
true glory and disgrace. But that was all. As far as the world
went, he didn’t fret and worry, but there was still ground he
left unturned.
Liezi7 could ride the wind and go soaring around with
cool and breezy skill, but after fifteen days he came back to
earth. As far as the search for good fortune went, he didn’t
fret and worry. He escaped the trouble of walking, but he
still had to depend on something to get around. If he had
only mounted on the truth of Heaven and Earth, ridden the
changes of the six breaths, and thus wandered through the
boundless, then what would he have had to depend on?
Therefore I say, the Perfect Man has no self; the Holy
Man has no merit; the Sage has no fame.8
Yao wanted to cede the empire to Xu You. “When the sun
and moon have already come out,” he said, “it’s a waste of
light to go on burning the torches, isn’t it? When the
seasonal rains are falling, it’s a waste of water to go on
irrigating the fields. If you took the throne, the world would
be well ordered. I go on occupying it, but all I can see are
my failings. I beg to turn over the world to you.”
Xu You said, “You govern the world and the world is
already well governed. Now if I take your place, will I be
doing it for a name? But name is only the guest of reality—
will I be doing it so I can play the part of a guest? When the
tailorbird builds her nest in the deep wood, she uses no
more than one branch. When the mole drinks at the river, he
takes no more than a bellyful. Go home and forget the
matter, my lord. I have no use for the rulership of the
world! Though the cook may not run his kitchen properly,
the priest and the impersonator of the dead at the sacrifice
do not leap over the wine casks and sacrificial stands and
go take his place.”9
Jian Wu said to Lian Shu, “I was listening to Jie Yu’s talk—
big and nothing to back it up, going on and on without
turning around. I was completely dumbfounded at his words —no more end than the Milky Way, wild and wide of the
mark, never coming near human affairs!”
“What were his words like?” asked Lian Shu.
“He said that there is a Holy Man living on faraway
Gushe Mountain, with skin like ice or snow and gentle and
shy like a young girl. He doesn’t eat the five grains but
sucks the wind, drinks the dew, climbs up on the clouds and
mist, rides a flying dragon, and wanders beyond the four
seas. By concentrating his spirit, he can protect creatures
from sickness and plague and make the harvest plentiful. I
thought this all was insane and refused to believe it.”
“You would!” said Lian Shu. “We can’t expect a blind
man to appreciate beautiful patterns or a deaf man to listen
to bells and drums. And blindness and deafness are not
confined to the body alone—the understanding has them,
too, as your words just now have shown. This man, with this
virtue of his, is about to embrace the ten thousand things
and roll them into one. Though the age calls for reform,
why should he wear himself out over the affairs of the
world? There is nothing that can harm this man. Though
floodwaters pile up to the sky, he will not drown. Though a
great drought melts metal and stone and scorches the earth
and hills, he will not be burned. From his dust and leavings
alone, you could mold a Yao or a Shun! Why should he
consent to bother about mere things?”
A man of Song who sold ceremonial hats made a trip to
Yue, but the Yue people cut their hair short and tattooed
their bodies and had no use for such things. Yao brought
order to the people of the world and directed the
government of all within the seas. But he went to see the
Four Masters of the faraway Gushe Mountain, [and when he
got home] north of the Fen River, he was dazed and had
forgotten his kingdom there.
Huizi10 said to Zhuangzi, “The king of Wei gave me some
seeds of a huge gourd. I planted them, and when they grew
up, the fruit was big enough to hold five piculs. I tried using
it for a water container, but it was so heavy I couldn’t lift it.
I split it in half to make dippers, but they were so large and
unwieldy that I couldn’t dip them into anything. It’s not that
the gourds weren’t fantastically big—but I decided they
were of no use, and so I smashed them to pieces.”
Zhuangzi said, “You certainly are dense when it comes to
using big things! In Song there was a man who was skilled at
making a salve to prevent chapped hands, and generation
after generation his family made a living by bleaching silk
in water. Atraveler heard about the salve and offered to buy
the prescription for a hundred measures of gold. The man
called everyone to a family council. ‘For generations we’ve
been bleaching silk, and we’ve never made more than a few
measures of gold,’ he said. ‘Now, if we sell our secret, we
can make a hundred measures in one morning. Let’s let him
have it!’ The traveler got the salve and introduced it to the
king of Wu, who was having trouble with the state of Yue.
The king put the man in charge of his troops, and that winter
they fought a naval battle with the men of Yue and gave
them a bad beating.11 A portion of the conquered territory
was awarded to the man as a fief. The salve had the power to
prevent chapped hands in either case; but one man used it to
get a fief, while the other one never got beyond silk
bleaching—because they used it in different ways. Now
you had a gourd big enough to hold five piculs. Why didn’t
you think of making it into a great tub so you could go
floating around the rivers and lakes, instead of worrying
because it was too big and unwieldy to dip into things!
Obviously you still have a lot of underbrush in your head!”
Huizi said to Zhuangzi, “I have a big tree called a shu. Its
trunk is too gnarled and bumpy to apply a measuring line to,
its branches too bent and twisty to match up to a compass
or square. You could stand it by the road, and no carpenter
would look at it twice. Your words, too, are big and useless,
and so everyone alike spurns them!”
Zhuangzi said, “Maybe you’ve never seen a wildcat or a
weasel. It crouches down and hides, watching for
something to come along. It leaps and races east and west,
not hesitating to go high or low—until it falls into the trap
and dies in the net. Then again there’s the yak, big as a cloud
covering the sky. It certainly knows how to be big, though it
doesn’t know how to catch rats. Now you have this big tree,
and you’re distressed because it’s useless. Why don’t you
plant it in Not-Even-Anything Village or the field of Broadand-Boundless, relax and do nothing by its side, or lie down
for a free and easy sleep under it? Axes will never shorten
its life, nothing can ever harm it. If there’s no use for it,
how can it come to grief or pain?”

2
DISCUSSION ON MAKING ALL
THINGS EQUAL
Ziqi of South Wall sat leaning on his armrest, staring up at
the sky and breathing—vacant and far away, as though he’d
lost his companion.1 Yan Cheng Ziyou, who was standing
by his side in attendance, said, “What is this? Can you really
make the body like a withered tree and the mind like dead
ashes? The man leaning on the armrest now is not the one
who leaned on it before!”
Ziqi said, “You do well to ask the question, Yan. Now I
have lost myself. Do you understand that? You hear the
piping of men, but you haven’t heard the piping of earth. Or
if you’ve heard the piping of earth, you haven’t heard the
piping of Heaven!”
Ziyou, “May I venture to ask what this means?”
Ziqi said, “The Great Clod belches out breath, and its
name is wind. So long as it doesn’t come forth, nothing
happens. But when it does, then ten thousand hollows begin
crying wildly. Can’t you hear them, long drawn out? In the
mountain forests that lash and sway, there are huge trees a
hundred spans around with hollows and openings like
noses, like mouths, like ears, like jugs, like cups, like
mortars, like rifts, like ruts. They roar like waves, whistle
like arrows, screech, gasp, cry, wail, moan, and howl, those
in the lead calling out yeee!, those behind calling out yuuu!
In a gentle breeze they answer faintly, but in a full gale the
chorus is gigantic. And when the fierce wind has passed on,
then all the hollows are empty again. Have you never seen
the tossing and trembling that goes on?”
Ziyou said, “By the piping of earth, then, you mean
simply [the sound of] these hollows, and by the piping of
man, [the sound of] flutes and whistles. But may I ask about
the piping of Heaven?”
Ziqi said, “Blowing on the ten thousand things in a
different way, so that each can be itself—all take what they
want for themselves, but who does the sounding?”2
Great understanding is broad and unhurried; little
understanding is cramped and busy. Great words are clear
and limpid;3 little words are shrill and quarrelsome. In
sleep, men’s spirits go visiting; in waking hours, their
bodies hustle. With everything they meet they become
entangled. Day after day they use their minds in strife,
sometimes grandiose, sometimes sly, sometimes petty.
Their little fears are mean and trembly; their great fears are
stunned and overwhelming. They bound off like an arrow or
a crossbow pellet, certain that they are the arbiters of right
and wrong. They cling to their position as though they had
sworn before the gods, sure that they are holding on to
victory. They fade like fall and winter—such is the way they
dwindle day by day. They drown in what they do—you
cannot make them turn back. They grow dark, as though
sealed with seals—such are the excesses of their old age.
And when their minds draw near to death, nothing can
restore them to the light.
Joy, anger, grief, delight, worry, regret, fickleness,
inflexibility, modesty, willfulness, candor, insolence—
music from empty holes, mushrooms springing up in
dampness, day and night replacing each other before us, and
no one knows where they sprout from. Let it be! Let it be!
[It is enough that] morning and evening we have them, and
they are the means by which we live. Without them, we
would not exist; without us, they would have nothing to take
hold of. This comes close to the matter. But I do not know
what makes them the way they are. It would seem as though
they have some True Master, and yet I find no trace of him.
He can act—that is certain. Yet I cannot see his form. He
has identity but no form.
The hundred joints, the nine openings, the six organs, all
come together and exist here [as my body]. But which part
should I feel closest to? I should delight in all parts, you
say? But there must be one I ought to favor more. If not, are
they all of them mere servants? But if they all are servants,
then how can they keep order among themselves? Or do
they take turns being lord and servant? It would seem as
though there must be some True Lord among them. But
whether or not I succeed in discovering his identity, it
neither adds to nor detracts from his Truth.
Once a man receives this fixed bodily form, he holds on
to it, waiting for the end. Sometimes clashing with things,
sometimes bending before them, he runs his course like a
galloping steed, and nothing can stop him. Is he not
pathetic? Sweating and laboring to the end of his days and
never seeing his accomplishment, utterly exhausting
himself and never knowing where to look for rest—can you
help pitying him? I’m not dead yet! he says, but what good
is that? His body decays, his mind follows it—can you deny
that this is a great sorrow? Man’s life has always been a
muddle like this. How could I be the only muddled one, and
other men not muddled?
If a man follows the mind given him and makes it his
teacher, then who can be without a teacher? Why must you
comprehend the process of change and form your mind on
that basis before you can have a teacher? Even an idiot has
his teacher. But to fail to abide by this mind and still insist
on your rights and wrongs—this is like saying that you set
off for Yue today and got there yesterday.4 This is to claim
that what doesn’t exist exists. If you claim that what doesn’t
exist exists, then even the holy sage Yu couldn’t understand
you, much less a person like me!
Words are not just wind. Words have something to say.
But if what they have to say is not fixed, then do they really
say something? Or do they say nothing? People suppose
that words are different from the peeps of baby birds, but is
there any difference, or isn’t there? What does the Way
rely on,5 that we have true and false? What do words rely
on, that we have right and wrong? How can the Way go away
and not exist? How can words exist and not be acceptable?
When the Way relies on little accomplishments and words
rely on vain show, then we have the rights and wrongs of the
Confucians and the Mohists. What one calls right, the other
calls wrong; what one calls wrong, the other calls right. But
if we want to right their wrongs and wrong their rights, then
the best thing to use is clarity.
Everything has its “that,” everything has its “this.” From
the point of view of “that,” you cannot see it; but through
understanding, you can know it. So I say, “that” comes out
of “this,” and “this” depends on “that”—which is to say that
“this” and “that” give birth to each other. But where there is
birth, there must be death; where there is death, there must
be birth. Where there is acceptability, there must be
unacceptability; where there is unacceptability, there must
be acceptability. Where there is recognition of right, there
must be recognition of wrong; where there is recognition
of wrong, there must be recognition of right. Therefore the
sage does not proceed in such a way but illuminates all in
the light of Heaven.6 He, too, recognizes a “this” but a
“this” that is also “that,” a “that” that is also “this.” His
“that” has both a right and a wrong in it; his “this,” too, has
both a right and a wrong in it. So, in fact, does he still have
a “this” and “that”? Or does he, in fact, no longer have a
“this” and “that”? A state in which “this” and “that” no
longer find their opposites is called the hinge of the Way. When the hinge is fitted into the socket, it can respond
endlessly. Its right, then, is a single endlessness, and its
wrong, too, is a single endlessness. So I say, the best thing
to use is clarity.
To use an attribute to show that attributes are not
attributes is not as good as using a nonattribute to show that
attributes are not attributes. To use a horse to show that a
horse is not a horse is not as good as using a non-horse to
show that a horse is not a horse;7 Heaven and earth are one
attribute; the ten thousand things are one horse. What is acceptable we call acceptable; what is
unacceptable we call unacceptable. A road is made by
people walking on it; things are so because they are called
so. What makes them so? Making them so makes them so.
What makes them not so? Making them not so makes them
not so. Things all must have that which is so; things all must
have that which is acceptable. There is nothing that is not
so, nothing that is not acceptable.
For this reason, whether you point to a little stalk or a
great pillar, a leper or the beautiful Xishi, things ribald and
shady, or things grotesque and strange, the Way makes them
all into one. Their dividedness is their completeness; their
completeness is their impairment. No thing is either
complete or impaired, but all are made into one again. Only
the man of far-reaching vision knows how to make them
into one. So he has no use [for categories] but relegates all
to the constant. The constant is the useful; the useful is the
passable; the passable is the successful; and with success,
all is accomplished. He relies on this alone, relies on it and
does not know he is doing so. This is called the Way.
But to wear out your brain trying to make things into one
without realizing that they are all the same—this is called
“three in the morning.” What do I mean by “three in the
morning”? When the monkey trainer was handing out
acorns, he said, “You get three in the morning and four at
night.” This made all the monkeys furious. “Well, then,” he
said, “you get four in the morning and three at night.” The
monkeys all were delighted. There was no change in the
reality behind the words, and yet the monkeys responded
with joy and anger. Let them, if they want to. So the sage
harmonizes with both right and wrong and rests in Heaven
the Equalizer. This is called walking two roads.
The understanding of the men of ancient times went a
long way. How far did it go? To the point where some of
them believed that things have never existed—so far, to the
end, where nothing can be added. Those at the next stage
thought that things exist but recognized no boundaries
among them. Those at the next stage thought there were
boundaries but recognized no right and wrong. Because
right and wrong appeared, the Way was injured, and because
the Way was injured, love became complete. But do such
things as completion and injury really exist, or do they not?
There is such a thing as completion and injury—Mr.
Zhao playing the lute is an example. There is such a thing as
no completion and no injury—Mr. Zhao not playing the lute
is an example.8 Zhao Wen played the lute; Music Master
Kuang waved his baton; Huizi leaned on his desk. The
knowledge of these three was close to perfection. All were
masters, and therefore their names have been handed down
to later ages. Only in their likes were they different from
him [the true sage]. What they liked, they tried to make
clear. What he is not clear about, they tried to make clear,
and so they ended in the foolishness of “hard” and “white.”9
Their sons, too, devoted all their lives to their fathers’10
theories but, till their death, never reached any completion.
Can these men be said to have attained completion? If so,
then so have all the rest of us. Or can they not be said to
have attained completion? If so, then neither we nor
anything else has ever attained it.
The torch of chaos and doubt—this is what the sage
steers by.11 So he does not use things but relegates all to
the constant. This is what it means to use clarity.
Now I am going to make a statement here. I don’t know
whether or not it fits into the category of other people’s
statements. But whether it fits into their category or
whether it doesn’t, it obviously fits into some category. So
in that respect, it is no different from their statements.
However, let me try making my statement.
There is a beginning. There is a not yet beginning to be a
beginning. There is a not yet beginning to be a not yet
beginning to be a beginning. There is being. There is
nonbeing. There is a not yet beginning to be nonbeing.
There is a not yet beginning to be a not yet beginning to be
nonbeing. Suddenly there is being and nonbeing. But
between this being and nonbeing, I don’t really know which
is being and which is nonbeing. Now I have just said
something. But I don’t know whether what I have said has
really said something or whether it hasn’t said something.
There is nothing in the world bigger than the tip of an
autumn hair, and Mount Tai is little. No one has lived longer
than a dead child, and Pengzu died young.12 Heaven and
earth were born at the same time I was, and the ten thousand
things are one with me.
We have already become one, so how can I say anything?
But I have just said that we are one, so how can I not be
saying something? The one and what I said about it make
two, and two and the original one make three. If we go on
this way, then even the cleverest mathematician, much less
an ordinary man, can’t tell where we’ll end. If by moving
from nonbeing to being, we get to three, how far will we
get if we move from being to being? Better not to move but
to let things be!
The Way has never known boundaries; speech has no
constancy. But because of [the recognition of a] “this,”
there came to be boundaries. Let me tell you what the
boundaries are. There is left, there is right, there are
theories, there are debates,13 there are divisions, there are
discriminations, there are emulations, and there are
contentions. These are called the Eight Virtues.14 As to
what is beyond the Six Realms,15 the sage admits it exists
but does not theorize. As to what is within the Six Realms,
he theorizes but does not debate. In the case of the Spring
and Autumn,16 the record of the former kings of past
ages, the sage debates but does not discriminate. So [I say,]
those who divide fail to divide; those who discriminate fail
to discriminate. What does this mean, you ask? The sage
embraces things. Ordinary men discriminate among them
and parade their discriminations before others. So I say,
those who discriminate fail to see.
The Great Way is not named; Great Discriminations are
not spoken; Great Benevolence is not benevolent; Great
Modesty is not humble; Great Daring does not attack. If the
Way is made clear, it is not the Way. If discriminations are
put into words, they do not suffice. If benevolence has a
constant object, it cannot be universal.17 If modesty is
fastidious, it cannot be trusted. If daring attacks, it cannot
be complete. These five all are round, but they tend toward
the square.18
Therefore understanding that rests in what it does not
understand is the finest. Who can understand
discriminations that are not spoken, the Way that is not a
way? If he can understand this, he may be called the
Reservoir of Heaven. Pour into it and it is never full, dip
from it and it never runs dry, and yet it does not know
where the supply comes from. This is called the Shaded
Light.19
So it is that long ago Yao said to Shun, “I want to attack
the rulers of Zong, Kuai, and Xuao. Even as I sit on my
throne, this thought nags at me. Why is this?”
Shun replied, “These three rulers are only little dwellers
in the weeds and brush. Why this nagging desire? Long ago,
ten suns came out all at once, and the ten thousand things
were all lighted up. And how much greater is virtue than
these suns!”20
Nie Que asked Wang Ni, “Do you know what all things
agree in calling right?”
“How would I know that?” said Wang Ni.
“Do you know that you don’t know it?”
“How would I know that?”
“Then do things know nothing?”
“How would I know that? However, suppose I try saying
something. What way do I have of knowing that if I say I
know something I don’t really not know it? Or what way do
I have of knowing that if I say I don’t know something I
don’t really in fact know it? Now let me ask you some
questions. If a man sleeps in a damp place, his back aches
and he ends up half paralyzed, but is this true of a loach? If
he lives in a tree, he is terrified and shakes with fright, but
is this true of a monkey? Of these three creatures, then,
which one knows the proper place to live? Men eat the
flesh of grass-fed and grain-fed animals, deer eat grass,
centipedes find snakes tasty, and hawks and falcons relish
mice. Of these four, which knows how food ought to taste?
Monkeys pair with monkeys, deer go out with deer, and fish
play around with fish. Men claim that Maoqiang and Lady
Li were beautiful; but if fish saw them, they would dive to
the bottom of the stream; if birds saw them, they would fly
away; and if deer saw them, they would break into a run. Of
these four, which knows how to fix the standard of beauty
for the world? The way I see it, the rules of benevolence
and righteousness and the paths of right and wrong all are
hopelessly snarled and jumbled. How could I know anything
about such dis criminations?”
Nie Que said, “If you don’t know what is profitable or
harmful, then does the Perfect Man likewise know nothing
of such things?” Wang Ni replied, “The Perfect Man is godlike. Though
the great swamps blaze, they cannot burn him; though the
great rivers freeze, they cannot chill him; though swift
lightning splits the hills and howling gales shake the sea,
they cannot frighten him. A man like this rides the clouds
and mist, straddles the sun and moon, and wanders beyond
the four seas. Even life and death have no effect on him,
much less the rules of profit and loss!”
Ju Que said to Zhang Wuzi, “I have heard Confucius say that
the sage does not work at anything, does not pursue profit,
does not dodge harm, does not enjoy being sought after,
does not follow the Way, says nothing yet says something,
says something yet says nothing, and wanders beyond the
dust and grime. Confucius himself regarded these as wild
and flippant words, though I believe they describe the
working of the mysterious Way. What do you think of
them?”
Zhang Wuzi said, “Even the Yellow Emperor would be
confused if he heard such words, so how could you expect
Confucius to understand them? What’s more, you’re too
hasty in your own appraisal. You see an egg and demand a
crowing cock, see a crossbow pellet and demand a roast
dove. I’m going to try speaking some reckless words, and I
want you to listen to them recklessly. How will that be? The
sage leans on the sun and moon, tucks the universe under
his arm, merges himself with things, leaves the confusion
and muddle as it is, and looks on slaves as exalted. Ordinary
men strain and struggle; the sage is stupid and blockish. He
takes part in ten thousand ages and achieves simplicity in
oneness. For him, all the ten thousand things are what they
are, and thus they enfold one another.
“How do I know that loving life is not a delusion? How
do I know that in hating death I am not like a man who,
having left home in his youth, has forgotten the way back?
“Lady Li was the daughter of the border guard of Ai.21
When she was first taken captive and brought to the state of
Jin, she wept until her tears drenched the collar of her robe.
But later, when she went to live in the palace of the ruler,
shared his couch with him, and ate the delicious meats of
his table, she wondered why she had ever wept. How do I
know that the dead do not wonder why they ever longed for
life?
“He who dreams of drinking wine may weep when
morning comes; he who dreams of weeping may in the
morning go off to hunt. While he is dreaming, he does not
know it is a dream, and in his dream, he may even try to
interpret a dream. Only after he wakes does he know it was
a dream. And someday there will be a great awakening when
we know that this is all a great dream. Yet the stupid believe
they are awake, busily and brightly assuming they
understand things, calling this man ruler, that one herdsman —how dense! Confucius and you both are dreaming! And
when I say you are dreaming, I am dreaming, too. Words
like these will be labeled the Supreme Swindle. Yet after
ten thousand generations, a great sage may appear who will
know their meaning, and it will still be as though he
appeared with astonishing speed.
“Suppose you and I have had an argument. If you have
beaten me instead of my beating you, then are you
necessarily right, and am I necessarily wrong? If I have
beaten you instead of your beating me, then am I
necessarily right, and are you necessarily wrong? Is one of
us right and the other wrong? Are both of us right, or are
both of us wrong? If you and I don’t know the answer, then
other people are bound to be even more in the dark. Whom
shall we get to decide what is right? Shall we get someone
who agrees with you to decide? But if he already agrees
with you, how can he decide fairly? Shall we get someone
who agrees with me? But if he already agrees with me, how
can he decide? Shall we get someone who disagrees with
both of us? But if he already disagrees with both of us, how
can he decide? Shall we get someone who agrees with both
of us? But if he already agrees with both of us, how can he
decide? Obviously, then, neither you nor I nor anyone else
can know the answer. Shall we wait for still another person?
“But waiting for one shifting voice [to pass judgment on]
another is the same as waiting for none of them.22
Harmonize them all with the Heavenly Equality, leave them
to their endless changes, and so live out your years. What
do I mean by harmonizing them with the Heavenly Equality?
Right is not right; so is not so. If right were really right, it
would differ so clearly from not right that there would be
no need for argument. If so were really so, it would differ
so clearly from not so that there would be no need for
argument. Forget the years; forget distinctions. Leap into
the boundless and make it your home!”
Penumbra said to Shadow, “A little while ago you were
walking, and now you’re standing still; a little while ago you
were sitting, and now you’re standing up. Why this lack of
independent action?”
Shadow said, “Do I have to wait for something before I
can be like this? Does what I wait for also have to wait for
something before it can be like this? Am I waiting for the
scales of a snake or the wings of a cicada? How do I know
why it is so? How do I know why it isn’t so?”23
Once Zhuang Zhou dreamed he was a butterfly, a butterfly
flitting and fluttering around, happy with himself and doing
as he pleased. He didn’t know he was Zhuang Zhou.
Suddenly he woke up, and there he was, solid and
unmistakable Zhuang Zhou. But he didn’t know if he were
Zhuang Zhou who had dreamed he was a butterfly or a
butterfly dreaming he was Zhuang Zhou. Between Zhuang
Zhou and a butterfly, there must be some distinction! This
is called the Transformation of Things

4
IN THE WORLD OF MEN
Yan Hui went to see Confucius and asked permission to
take a trip.1
“Where are you going?”
“I’m going to Wei.”
“What will you do there?”
“I have heard that the ruler of Wei is very young. He acts
in an independent manner, thinks little of how he rules his
state, and fails to see his faults. It is nothing to him to lead
his people into peril, and his dead are reckoned by
swampfuls like so much grass.2 His people have nowhere
to turn. I have heard you say, Master, ‘Leave the state that is
well ordered and go to the state in chaos! At the doctor’s
gate are many sick men.’ I want to use these words as my
standard, in hopes that I can restore his state to health.”
“Ah,” said Confucius, “you will probably go and get
yourself executed, that’s all. The Way doesn’t want things
mixed in with it. When it becomes a mixture, it becomes
many ways; with many ways, there is a lot of bustle; and
where there is a lot of bustle, there is trouble—trouble that
has no remedy! The Perfect Man of ancient times made
sure that he had it in himself before he tried to give it to
others. When you’re not even sure what you’ve got in
yourself, how do you have time to bother about what some
tyrant is doing?
“Do you know what it is that destroys virtue and where
wisdom comes from? Virtue is destroyed by fame, and
wisdom comes out of wrangling. Fame is something to beat
people down with, and wisdom is a device for wrangling.
Both are evil weapons—not the sort of thing to bring you
success. Though your virtue may be great and your good
faith unassailable, if you do not understand men’s spirits,
though your fame may be wide and you do not strive with
others, if you do not understand men’s minds but instead
appear before a tyrant and force him to listen to sermons
on benevolence and righteousness, measures and standards —this is simply using other men’s bad points to parade
your own excellence. You will be called a plaguer of
others. He who plagues others will be plagued in turn. You
will probably be plagued by this man.
“And suppose he is the kind who actually delights in
worthy men and hates the unworthy—then why does he
need you to try to make him any different? You had best
keep your advice to yourself! Kings and dukes always lord
it over others and fight to win the argument. You will find
your eyes growing dazed, your color changing, your mouth
working to invent excuses, your attitude becoming more
and more humble, until in your mind you end by supporting
him. This is to pile fire on fire, to add water to water, and is
called ‘increasing the excessive.’ If you give in at the
beginning, there will be no place to stop. Since your fervent
advice is almost certain not to be believed, you are bound
to die if you come into the presence of a tyrant.
“In ancient times Jie put Guan Longfeng to death, and
Zhou put Prince Bi Gan to death. Both Guan Longfeng and
Prince Bi Gan were scrupulous in their conduct, bent down
to comfort and aid the common people, and used their
positions as ministers to oppose their superiors. Therefore
their rulers, Jie and Zhou, utilized their scrupulous conduct
as a means to trap them, for they were too fond of good
fame. In ancient times Yao attacked Congzhi and Xuao, and
Yu attacked Youhu, and these states were left empty and
unpeopled, their rulers cut down. It was because they
employed their armies constantly and never ceased their
search for gain. All were seekers of fame or gain—have
you alone not heard of them? Even the sages cannot cope
with men who are after fame or gain, much less a person
like you!
“However, you must have some plan in mind. Come, tell
me what it is.”
Yan Hui said, “If I am grave and empty-hearted, diligent
and of one mind, won’t that do?”
“Goodness, how could that do? You may put on a fine
outward show and seem very impressive, but you can’t
avoid having an uncertain look on your face, anymore than
an ordinary man can.3 And then you try to gauge this man’s
feelings and seek to influence his mind. But with him, what
is called ‘the virtue that advances a little each day’ would
not succeed, much less a great display of virtue! He will
stick fast to his position and never be converted. Though he
may make outward signs of agreement, inwardly he will not
give it a thought! How could such an approach succeed?”
“Well then, suppose I am inwardly direct, outwardly
compliant, and do my work through the examples of
antiquity? By being inwardly direct, I can be the companion
of Heaven. Being a companion of Heaven, I know that the
Son of Heaven and I are equally the sons of Heaven. Then
why would I use my words to try to get men to praise me or
to try to get them not to praise me? Aman like this, people
call The Child. This is what I mean by being a companion of
Heaven.
“By being outwardly compliant, I can be a companion of
men. Lifting up the tablet, kneeling, bowing, crouching
down—this is the etiquette of a minister. Everybody does
it, so why shouldn’t I? If I do what other people do, they can
hardly criticize me. This is what I mean by being a
companion of men.
“By doing my work through the examples of antiquity, I
can be the companion of ancient times. Though my words
may in fact be lessons and reproaches, they belong to
ancient times and not to me. In this way, though I may be
blunt, I cannot be blamed. This is what I mean by being a
companion of antiquity. If I go about it in this way, will it
do?”
Confucius said, “Goodness, how could that do? You
have too many policies and plans, and you haven’t seen what
is needed. You will probably get off without incurring any
blame, yes. But that will be as far as it goes. How do you
think you can actually convert him? You are still making the
mind
4 your teacher!”
Yan Hui said, “I have nothing more to offer. May I ask
the proper way?”
“You must fast!” said Confucius. “I will tell you what that
means. Do you think it is easy to do anything while you
have a mind? If you do, Bright Heaven will not sanction
you.”
Yan Hui said, “My family is poor. I haven’t drunk wine or
eaten any strong foods for several months. So can I be
considered as having fasted?”
“That is the fasting one does before a sacrifice, not the
fasting of the mind.”
“May I ask what the fasting of the mind is?”
Confucius said, “Make your will one! Don’t listen with
your ears, listen with your mind. No, don’t listen with your
mind, but listen with your spirit. Listening stops with the
ears, the mind stops with recognition, but spirit is empty
and waits for all things. The Way gathers in emptiness
alone. Emptiness is the fasting of the mind.”
Yan Hui said, “Before I heard this, I was certain that I
was Hui. But now that I have heard it, there is no more Hui.
Can this be called emptiness?”
“That’s all there is to it,” said Confucius. “Now I will tell
you. You may go and play in his bird cage but never be
moved by fame. If he listens, then sing; if not, keep still.
Have no gate, no opening,5 but make oneness your house
and live with what cannot be avoided. Then you will be
close to success.
“It is easy to keep from walking; the hard thing is to walk
without touching the ground. It is easy to cheat when you
work for men but hard to cheat when you work for Heaven.
You have heard of flying with wings, but you have never
heard of flying without wings. You have heard of the
knowledge that knows, but you have never heard of the
knowledge that does not know. Look into that closed room,
the empty chamber where brightness is born! Fortune and
blessing gather where there is stillness. But if you do not
keep still—this is what is called sitting but racing around.6
Let your ears and eyes communicate with what is inside and
put mind and knowledge on the outside. Then even gods and
spirits will come to dwell, not to speak of men! This is the
changing of the ten thousand things, the bond of Yu and
Shun, the constant practice of Fu Xi and Ji Qu.7 How much
more should it be a rule for lesser men!”
Zigao, duke of She,8 who was being sent on a mission to
Qi, consulted Confucius. “The king is sending me on a very
important mission. Qi will probably treat me with great
honor but will be in no hurry to do anything more. Even a
commoner cannot be forced to act, much less one of the
feudal lords. I am very worried about it. You once said to
me, ‘In all affairs, whether large or small, there are few
men who reach a happy conclusion except through the Way.
If you do not succeed, you are bound to suffer from the
judgment of men. If you do succeed, you are bound to
suffer from the yin and yang.9 To suffer no harm whether
or not you succeed—only the man who has virtue can do
that.’ I am a man who eats plain food that is simply cooked,
so that no one ever complains of the heat in my kitchens.10
Yet this morning I received my orders from the king and by
evening I am gulping ice water—do you suppose I have
developed some kind of internal fever? I have not even
gone to Qi to see what the situation is like, and already I am
suffering from the yin and yang. And if I do not succeed, I
am bound to suffer from the judgment of men. I will have
both worries. As a minister, I am not capable of carrying
out this mission. But perhaps you have some advice you can
give me….”
Confucius said, “In the world, there are two great
decrees: one is fate and the other is duty.11 That a son
should love his parents is fate—you cannot erase this from
his heart. That a subject should serve his ruler is duty—
there is no place he can go and be without his ruler, no
place he can escape to between heaven and earth. These are
called the great decrees. Therefore, to serve your parents
and be content to follow them anywhere—this is the
perfection of filial piety. To serve your ruler and be content
to do anything for him—this is the peak of loyalty. And to
serve your own mind so that sadness or joy does not sway
or move it; to understand what you can do nothing about and
to be content with it as with fate—this is the perfection of
virtue. As a subject and a son, you are bound to find things
you cannot avoid. If you act in accordance with the state of
affairs and forget about yourself, then what leisure will you
have to love life and hate death? Act in this way, and you
will be all right.
“I want to tell you something else I have learned. In all
human relations, if the two parties are living close to each
other, they may form a bond through personal trust. But if
they are far apart, they must use words to communicate
their loyalty, and words must be transmitted by someone.
To transmit words that are either pleasing to both parties or
infuriating to both parties is one of the most difficult
things in the world. When both parties are pleased, there
must be some exaggeration of the good points; and when
both parties are angered, there must be some exaggeration
of the bad points. Anything that smacks of exaggeration is
irresponsible. Where there is irresponsibility, no one will
trust what is said, and when that happens, the man who is
transmitting the words will be in danger. Therefore the
aphorism says, ‘Transmit the established facts; do not
transmit words of exaggeration.’ If you do that, you will
probably come out all right.
“When men get together to pit their strength in games of
skill, they start off in a light and friendly mood but usually
end up in a dark and angry one, and if they go on too long,
they start resorting to various underhanded tricks. When
men meet at some ceremony to drink, they start off in an
orderly manner but usually end up in disorder; and if they
go on too long, they start indulging in various irregular
amusements. It is the same with all things. What starts out
being sincere usually ends up being deceitful. What was
simple in the beginning acquires monstrous proportions in
the end.
“Words are like wind and waves; actions are a matter of
gain and loss. Wind and waves are easily moved; questions
of gain and loss easily lead to danger. Hence anger arises
from no other cause than clever words and one-sided
speeches. When animals face death, they do not care what
cries they make; their breath comes in gasps, and a wild
fierceness is born in their hearts. [Men, too,] if you press
them too hard, are bound to answer you with ill-natured
hearts, though they do not know why they do so. If they
themselves do not understand why they behave like this,
then who knows where it will end?
“Therefore the aphorism says, ‘Do not deviate from your
orders; do not press for completion.’ To go beyond the
limit is excess; to deviate from orders or press for
completion is a dangerous thing. Agood completion takes a
long time; a bad completion cannot be changed later. Can
you afford to be careless?
“Just go along with things and let your mind move freely.
Resign yourself to what cannot be avoided and nourish what
is within you—this is best. What more do you have to do to
fulfill your mission? Nothing is as good as following
orders (obeying fate)—that’s how difficult it is!”12
Yan He, who had been appointed tutor to the crown prince,
son of Duke Ling of Wei, went to consult Ju Boyu.13
“Here is this man who by nature is lacking in virtue. If I let
him go on with his unruliness, I will endanger the state. If I
try to impose some rule on him, I will endanger myself. He
knows enough to recognize the faults of others, but he
doesn’t know his own faults. What can I do with a man like
this?”
“Avery good question,” said Ju Boyu. “Be careful, be on
your guard, and make sure that you yourself are in the right!
In your actions, it is best to follow along with him, and in
your mind, it is best to harmonize with him. However, these
two courses involve certain dangers. Though you follow
along, you don’t want to be pulled into his doings, and
though you harmonize, you don’t want to be drawn out too
far. If in your actions you follow along to the extent of
being pulled in with him, then you will be overthrown,
destroyed, wiped out, and brought to your knees. If in your
mind you harmonize to the extent of being drawn out, then
you will be talked about, named, blamed, and condemned. If
he wants to be a child, be a child with him. If he wants to
follow erratic ways, follow erratic ways with him. If he
wants to be reckless, be reckless with him. Understand him
thoroughly, and lead him to the point where he is without
fault.14
“Don’t you know about the praying mantis that waved its
arms angrily in front of an approaching carriage, unaware
that it was incapable of stopping it? Such was the high
opinion it had of its talents. Be careful, be on your guard! If
you offend him by parading your store of talents, you will
be in danger!
“Don’t you know how the tiger trainer goes about it? He
doesn’t dare give the tiger any living thing to eat for fear it
will learn the taste of fury by killing it. He doesn’t dare
give it any whole thing to eat for fear it will learn the taste
of fury by tearing it apart. He gauges the state of the tiger’s
appetite and thoroughly understands its fierce disposition.
Tigers are a different breed from men, and yet you can train
them to be gentle with their keepers by following along
with them. The men who get killed are the ones who go
against them.
“The horse lover uses a fine box to catch the dung and a
giant clam shell to catch the stale. But if a mosquito or a
fly lights on the horse and he slaps it at the wrong time,
then the horse will break the bit, hurt its head, and bang its
chest. The horse lover tries to think of everything, but his
affection leads him into error. Can you afford to be
careless?”
Carpenter Shi went to Qi and, when he got to Crooked
Shaft, he saw a serrate oak standing by the village shrine. It
was broad enough to shelter several thousand oxen and
measured a hundred spans around, towering above the hills.
The lowest branches were eighty feet from the ground, and
a dozen or so of them could have been made into boats.
There were so many sightseers that the place looked like a
fair, but the carpenter didn’t even glance around and went
o
and though I almost died, I’ve finally got it. This is of great
use to me. If I had been of some use, would I ever have
grown this large? Moreover, you and I are both of us things. What’s the point of this—things condemning things? You, a
worthless man about to die—how do you know I’m a
worthless tree?” When Carpenter Shi woke up, he reported his dream.
His apprentice said, “If it’s so intent on being of no use,
what’s it doing there at the village shrine?”15
“Shhh! Say no more! It’s only resting there. If we carp
and criticize, it will merely conclude that we don’t
understand it. Even if it weren’t at the shrine, do you
suppose it would be cut down? It protects itself in a
different way from ordinary people. If you try to judge it by
conventional standards, you’ll be way off!”
Ziqi of Nanbo was wandering around the Hill of Shang
when he saw a huge tree there, different from all the rest. A
thousand teams of horses could have taken shelter under it,
and its shade would have covered them all. Ziqi said, “What
tree is this? It must certainly have some extraordinary
usefulness!” But looking up, he saw that the smaller limbs
were gnarled and twisted, unfit for beams or rafters, and
looking down, he saw that the trunk was pitted and rotten
and could not be used for coffins. He licked one of the
leaves, and it blistered his mouth and made it sore. He
sniffed the odor, and it was enough to make a man drunk for
three days. “It turns out to be a completely unusable tree,”
said Ziqi, “and so it has been able to grow this big. Aha!—it
is this unusableness that the Holy Man makes use of!”
The region of Jingshi in Song is fine for growing
catalpas, cypresses, and mulberries. But those that are
more than one or two arm lengths around are cut down for
people who want monkey perches; those that are three or
four spans around are cut down for the ridgepoles of tall
roofs;16 and those that are seven or eight spans are cut
down for the families of nobles or rich merchants who
want side boards for coffins. So they never get to live out
the years Heaven gave them but are cut down in midjourney by axes. This is the danger of being usable. In the
Jie sacrifice,17 oxen with white foreheads, pigs with
turned-up snouts, and men with piles cannot be offered to
the river. This is something all the shamans know, and
hence they consider them inauspicious creatures. But the
Holy Man, for the same reason, considers them highly
auspicious.
There’s Crippled Shu—chin stuck down in his navel,
shoulders up above his head, pigtail pointing at the sky, his
five organs on the top, his two thighs pressing his ribs. By
sewing and washing, he gets enough to fill his mouth; by
handling a winnow and sifting out the good grain, he makes
enough to feed ten people. When the authorities call out
the troops, he stands in the crowd waving goodbye; when
they get up a big work party, they pass him over because
he’s a chronic invalid. And when they are doling out grain to
the ailing, he gets three big measures and ten bundles of
firewood. With a crippled body, he’s still able to look after
himself and finish out the years Heaven gave him. How
much better, then, if he had crippled virtue!
When Confucius visited Chu, Jie Yu, the madman of Chu,
wandered by his gate crying, “Phoenix, phoenix, how has
virtue failed! The future you cannot wait for; the past you
cannot pursue. When the world has the Way, the sage
succeeds; when the world is without the Way, the sage
survives. In times like the present, we do well to escape
penalty. Good fortune is as light as a feather, but nobody
knows how to pick it up. Misfortune is as heavy as the
earth, but nobody knows how to stay out of its way. Leave
off, leave off—this teaching men virtue! Dangerous,
dangerous—to mark off the ground and run! Fool, fool—
don’t spoil my walking! I walk a crooked way—don’t step
on my feet. The mountain trees do themselves harm; the
grease in the torch burns itself up. The cinnamon can be
eaten, and so it gets cut down; the lacquer tree can be used,
and so it gets hacked apart. All men know the use of the
useful, but nobody knows the use of the useless!”


17
AUTUMN FLOODS
The time of the autumn floods came, and the hundred
streams poured into the Yellow River. Its racing current
swelled to such proportions that, looking from bank to bank
or island to island, it was impossible to distinguish a horse
from a cow. Then the Lord of the River1 was beside
himself with joy, believing that all the beauty in the world
belonged to him alone. Following the current, he journeyed
east until at last he reached the North Sea. Looking east, he
could see no end to the water.
The Lord of the River began to wag his head and roll his
eyes. Peering far off in the direction of Ruo,2 he sighed
and said, “The common saying has it, ‘He has heard the Way
a mere hundred times, but he thinks he’s better than anyone
else.’It applies to me. In the past, I heard men belittling the
learning of Confucius and making light of the
righteousness of Bo Yi,3 though I never believed them.
Now, however, I have seen your unfathomable vastness. If I
hadn’t come to your gate,4 I should have been in danger. I
should forever have been laughed at by the masters of the
Great Method!”
Ruo of the North Sea said, “You can’t discuss the ocean
with a well frog—he’s limited by the space he lives in. You
can’t discuss ice with a summer insect—he’s bound to a
single season. You can’t discuss the Way with a cramped
scholar—he’s shackled by his doctrines. Now you have
come out beyond your banks and borders and have seen the
great sea—so you realize your own pettiness. From now
on, it will be possible to talk to you about the Great
Principle.
“Of all the waters of the world, none is as great as the
sea. Ten thousand streams flow into it—I have never heard
of a time when they stopped—and yet it is never full. The
water leaks away at Weilü
5—I have never heard of a time
when it didn’t—and yet the sea is never empty. Spring or
autumn, it never changes. Flood or drought, it takes no
notice. It is so much greater than the streams of the Yangzi
or the Yellow River that it is impossible to measure the
difference. But I have never, for this reason, prided myself
on it. I take my place with heaven and earth and receive
breath from the yin and yang. I sit here between heaven and
earth as a little stone or a little tree sits on a huge
mountain. Since I can see my own smallness, what reason
would I have to pride myself?
“Compare the area within the four seas with all that is
between heaven and earth—is it not like one little anthill in
a vast marsh? Compare the Middle Kingdom with the area
within the four seas—is it not like one tiny grain in a great
storehouse? When we refer to the things of creation, we
speak of them as numbering ten thousand—and man is only
one of them. We talk of the Nine Provinces where men are
most numerous, and yet of the whole area where grain and
foods are grown and where boats and carts pass back and
forth, man occupies only one fraction.6 Compared to the
ten thousand things, is he not like one little hair on the
body of a horse? What the Five Emperors passed along,
what the Three Kings fought over, what the benevolent man
grieves about, what the responsible man labors over—all is
no more than this!7 Bo Yi gained a reputation by giving it
up; Confucius passed himself off as learned because he
talked about it. But in priding themselves in this way, were
they not like you a moment ago priding yourself on your
floodwaters?”
“Well then,” said the Lord of the River, “if I recognize
the hugeness of heaven and earth and the smallness of the
tip of a hair, will that do?”
“No indeed!” said Ruo of the North Sea. “There is no
end to the weighing of things, no stop to time, no constancy
to the division of lots, no fixed rule to beginning and end.
Therefore great wisdom observes both far and near, and for
that reason, it recognizes small without considering it
paltry, recognizes large without considering it unwieldy, for
it knows that there is no end to the weighing of things. It
has a clear understanding of past and present, and for that
reason, it spends a long time without finding it tedious, a
short time without fretting at its shortness, for it knows
that time has no end. It perceives the nature of fullness and
emptiness, and for that reason, it does not delight if it
acquires something or worry if it loses it, for it knows that
there is no constancy to the division of lots. It
comprehends the Level Road, and for that reason, it does
not rejoice in life or look on death as a calamity, for it
knows that no fixed rule can be assigned to beginning and
end.
“Calculate what man knows, and it cannot compare with
what he does not know. Calculate the time he is alive, and it
cannot compare with the time before he was born. Yet man
takes something so small and tries to exhaust the
dimensions of something so large! Hence he is muddled
and confused and can never get anywhere. Looking at it this
way, how do we know that the tip of a hair can be singled
out as the measure of the smallest thing possible? Or how
do we know that heaven and earth can fully encompass the
dimensions of the largest thing possible?”
The Lord of the River said, “Men who debate such
matters these days all claim that the minutest thing has no
form and the largest thing cannot be encompassed. Is this a
true statement?”
Ruo of the North Sea said, “If from the standpoint of the
minute, we look at what is large, we cannot see to the end.
If from the standpoint of what is large, we look at what is
minute, we cannot distinguish it clearly. The minute is the
smallest of the small, the gigantic is the largest of the
large, and it is therefore convenient to distinguish between
them. But this is merely a matter of circumstance. Before
we can speak of coarse or fine, however, there must be
some form. If a thing has no form, then numbers cannot
express its dimensions, and if it cannot be encompassed,
then numbers cannot express its size. We can use words to
talk about the coarseness of things, and we can use our
minds to visualize the fineness of things. But what words
cannot describe and the mind cannot succeed in visualizing —this has nothing to do with coarseness or fineness.
“Therefore the Great Man in his actions will not harm
others, but he makes no show of benevolence or charity. He
will not move for the sake of profit, but he does not
despise the porter at the gate. He will not wrangle for
goods or wealth, but he makes no show of refusing or
relinquishing them. He will not enlist the help of others in
his work, but he makes no show of being self-supporting,
and he does not despise the greedy and base. His actions
differ from those of the mob, but he makes no show of
uniqueness or eccentricity. He is content to stay behind
with the crowd, but he does not despise those who run
forward to flatter and fawn. All the titles and stipends of the
age are not enough to stir him to exertion; all its penalties
and censures are not enough to make him feel shame. He
knows that no line can be drawn between right and wrong,
no border can be fixed between great and small. I have
heard it said, ‘The Man of the Way wins no fame, the
highest virtue8 wins no gain, the Great Man has no self.’ To
the most perfect degree, he goes along with what has been
allotted to him.”
The Lord of the River said, “Whether they are external
or internal to things, I do not understand how we come to
have these distinctions of noble and mean or of great and
small.”
Ruo of the North Sea said, “From the point of view of
the Way, things have no nobility or meanness. From the
point of view of things themselves, each regards itself as
noble and other things as mean. From the point of view of
common opinion, nobility and meanness are not
determined by the individual himself.
“From the point of view of differences, if we regard a
thing as big because there is a certain bigness to it, then
among all the ten thousand things there are none that are
not big. If we regard a thing as small because there is a
certain smallness to it, then among the ten thousand things
there are none that are not small. If we know that heaven
and earth are tiny grains and the tip of a hair is a range of
mountains, then we have perceived the law of difference.
“From the point of view of function, if we regard a thing
as useful because there is a certain usefulness to it, then
among all the ten thousand things there are none that are
not useful. If we regard a thing as useless because there is a
certain uselessness to it, then among the ten thousand
things there are none that are not useless. If we know that
east and west are mutually opposed but that one cannot do
without the other, then we can estimate the degree of
function.
“From the point of view of preference, if we regard a
thing as right because there is a certain right to it, then
among the ten thousand things there are none that are not
right. If we regard a thing as wrong because there is a
certain wrong to it, then among the ten thousand things
there are none that are not wrong. If we know that Yao and
Jie each thought himself right and condemned the other as
wrong, then we may understand how there are preferences
in behavior.
“In ancient times Yao abdicated in favor of Shun, and
Shun ruled as emperor; Kuai abdicated in favor of Zhi, and
Zhi was destroyed.9 Tang and Wu fought and became kings;
Duke Bo fought and was wiped out.10 Looking at it this
way, we see that struggling or giving way, behaving like a
Yao or like a Jie, may at one time be noble and at another
time be mean. It is impossible to establish any constant
rule.
“A beam or pillar can be used to batter down a city wall,
but it is no good for stopping up a little hole—this refers to
a difference in function. Thoroughbreds like Qiji and
Hualiu could gallop a thousand li in one day, but when it
came to catching rats, they were no match for the wildcat
or the weasel—this refers to a difference in skill. The
horned owl catches fleas at night and can spot the tip of a
hair, but when daylight comes, no matter how wide it opens
its eyes, it cannot see a mound or a hill—this refers to a
difference in nature. Now do you say that you are going to
make Right your master and do away with Wrong, or make
Order your master and do away with Disorder? If you do,
then you have not understood the principle of heaven and
earth or the nature of the ten thousand things. This is like
saying that you are going to make Heaven your master and
do away with Earth, or make Yin your master and do away
with Yang. Obviously it is impossible. If men persist in
talking this way without stop, they must be either fools or
deceivers!
“Emperors and kings have different ways of ceding their
thrones; the Three Dynasties had different rules of
succession. Those who went against the times and flouted
custom were called usurpers; those who went with the
times and followed custom were called companions of
righteousness. Be quiet, be quiet, O Lord of the River! How
could you understand anything about the gateway of
nobility and meanness or the house of great and small?”
“Well then,” said the Lord of the River, “what should I do
and what should I not do? How am I to know in the end what
to accept and what to reject, what to abide by and what to
discard?”
Ruo of the North Sea said, “From the point of view of
the Way, what is noble or what is mean? These are merely
what are called endless changes. Do not hobble your will,
or you will be departing far from the Way! What is few, or
what is many? These are merely what are called boundless
turnings.11 Do not strive to unify your actions, or you will
be at sixes and sevens with the Way! Be stern like the ruler
of a state—he grants no private favor. Be benign and
impartial like the god of the soil at the sacrifice—he grants
no private blessing. Be broad and expansive like the
endlessness of the four directions—they have nothing that
bounds or hedges them. Embrace the ten thousand things
universally—how could there be one you should give
special support to? This is called being without bent. When
the ten thousand things are unified and equal, then which is
short and which is long?
“The Way is without beginning or end, but things have
their life and death—you cannot rely on their fulfillment.
One moment empty, the next moment full—you cannot
depend on their form. The years cannot be held off; time
cannot be stopped. Decay, growth, fullness, and emptiness
end and then begin again. It is thus that we must describe
the plan of the Great Meaning and discuss the principles of
the ten thousand things. The life of things is a gallop, a
headlong dash—with every movement they alter, with every
moment they shift. What should you do and what should
you not do? Everything will change of itself, that is
certain!”
“If that is so,” said the Lord of the River, “then what is
there valuable about the Way?”
Ruo of the North Sea said, “He who understands the Way
is certain to have command of basic principles. He who has
command of basic principles is certain to know how to deal
with circumstances. And he who knows how to deal with
circumstances will not allow things to do him harm. When
a man has perfect virtue, fire cannot burn him, water cannot
drown him, cold and heat cannot afflict him, birds and
beasts cannot injure him. I do not say that he makes light of
these things. I mean that he distinguishes between safety
and danger, contents himself with fortune or misfortune,
and is cautious in his comings and goings. Therefore
nothing can harm him.
“Hence it is said: the Heavenly is on the inside, the
human is on the outside. Virtue resides in the Heavenly.
Understand the actions of Heaven and man, base yourself
on Heaven, take your stand in virtue,12 and then, although
you hasten or hold back, bend or stretch, you may return to
the essential and speak of the ultimate.”
“What do you mean by the Heavenly and the human?”
Ruo of the North Sea said, “Horses and oxen have four
feet—this is what I mean by the Heavenly. Putting a halter
on the horse’s head, piercing the ox’s nose—this is what I
mean by the human. So I say: do not let what is human wipe
out what is Heavenly; do not let what is purposeful wipe out
what is fated; do not let [the desire for] gain lead you after
fame. Be cautious, guard it, and do not lose it—this is what
I mean by returning to the True.”
The Kui13 envies the millipede, the millipede envies the
snake, the snake envies the wind, the wind envies the eye,
and the eye envies the mind.
The Kui said to the millipede, “I have this one leg that I
hop along on, though I make little progress. Now how in the
world do you manage to work all those ten thousand legs of
yours?”
The millipede said, “You don’t understand. Haven’t you
ever watched a man spit? He just gives a hawk and out it
comes, some drops as big as pearls, some as fine as mist,
raining down in a jumble of countless particles. Now all I
do is put in motion the heavenly mechanism in me—I’m
not aware of how the thing works.”
The millipede said to the snake, “I have all these legs
that I move along on, but I can’t seem to keep up with you
who have no legs. How is that?”
The snake said, “It’s just the heavenly mechanism
moving me along—how can I change the way I am? What
would I do with legs if I had them?”
The snake said to the wind, “I move my backbone and
ribs and manage to get along, though I still have some kind
of body. But now you come whirling up from the North Sea
and go whirling off to the South Sea, and you don’t seem to
have any body. How is that?”
The wind said, “It’s true that I whirl up from the North
Sea and whirl off to the South Sea. But if you hold up a
finger against me you’ve defeated me, and if you trample
on me you’ve likewise defeated me. On the other hand, I
can break down big trees and blow over great houses—this
is a talent that I alone have. So I take all the mass of little
defeats and make them into a Great Victory. To make a
Great Victory—only the sage is capable of that!”
When Confucius was passing through Kuang, the men of
Song surrounded him with several encirclements of troops,
but he went right on playing his lute and singing without a
stop.14 Zi Lu went in to see him and said, “Master, how can
you be so carefree?”
Confucius said, “Come, I will explain to you. For a long
time I have tried to stay out of the way of hardship. That I
have not managed to escape it is due to fate. For a long
time I have tried to achieve success. That I have not been
able to do so is due to the times. If it happens to be the age
of a Yao or a Shun, then there are no men in the world who
face hardship—but this is not because their wisdom saves
them. If it happens to be the age of a Jie or a Zhou, then
there are no men in the world who achieve success—but
this is not because their wisdom fails them. It is time and
circumstance that make it so.
“To travel across the water without shrinking from the
sea serpent or the dragon—this is the courage of the
fisherman. To travel over land without shrinking from the
rhinoceros or the tiger—this is the courage of the hunter.
To see the bare blades clashing before him and to look on
death as though it were life—this is the courage of the man
of ardor.15 To understand that hardship is a matter of fate,
that success is a matter of the times, and to face great
difficulty without fear—this is the courage of the sage. Be
content with it, Zi Lu. My fate has been decided for me.”
Shortly afterward the leader of the armed men came
forward and apologized. “We thought you were Yang Huo,
and that was why we surrounded you. Now that we see you
aren’t, we beg to take leave and withdraw.”
Gongsun Long said to Prince Mou of Wei,16 “When I was
young, I studied the Way of the former kings, and when I
grew older, I came to understand the conduct of
benevolence and righteousness. I reconciled difference and
sameness, distinguished hardness and whiteness, and
proved that not so was so, that the unacceptable was
acceptable. I confounded the wisdom of the hundred
schools and demolished the arguments of a host of
speakers. I believed that I had attained the highest degree of
accomplishment. But now I have heard the words of
Zhuangzi, and I am bewildered by their strangeness. I don’t
know whether my arguments are not as good as his, or
whether I am no match for him in understanding. I find now
that I can’t even open my beak. May I ask what you advise?”
Prince Mou leaned on his armrest and gave a great sigh,
and then he looked up at the sky and laughed, saying,
“Haven’t you ever heard about the frog in the caved-in well?
He said to the great turtle of the Eastern Sea, ‘What fun I
have! I come out and hop around the railing of the well, or I
go back in and take a rest in the wall where a tile has fallen
out. When I dive into the water, I let it hold me up under the
armpits and support my chin, and when I slip about in the
mud, I bury my feet in it and let it come up over my ankles.
I look around at the mosquito larvae and the crabs and
tadpoles, and I see that none of them can match me. To have
complete command of the water of one whole valley and to
monopolize all the joys of a caved-in well—this is the best
there is! Why don’t you come some time and see for
yourself?’
“But before the great turtle of the Eastern Sea had even
gotten his left foot in the well, his right knee was already
wedged fast. He backed out and withdrew a little, and then
began to describe the sea. ‘A distance of a thousand li
cannot indicate its greatness; a depth of a thousand fathoms
cannot express how deep it is. In the time of Yu, there were
floods for nine years out of ten, and yet its waters never
rose. In the time of Tang, there were droughts for seven
years out of eight, and yet its shores never receded. Never
to alter or shift, whether for an instant or an eternity; never
to advance or recede, whether the quantity of water flowing
in is great or small—this is the great delight of the Eastern
Sea!’
“When the frog in the caved-in well heard this, he was
dumbfounded with surprise, crestfallen, and completely at a
loss. Now your knowledge cannot even define the borders
of right and wrong, and still you try to see through the
words of Zhuangzi—this is like trying to make a mosquito
carry a mountain on its back or a pill bug race across the
Yellow River. You will never be up to the task!
“He whose understanding cannot grasp these minute and
subtle words but is fit only to win some temporary gain—is
he not like the frog in the caved-in well? Zhuangzi, now—at
this very moment he is treading the Yellow Springs17 or
leaping up to the vast blue. To him there is no north or
south—in utter freedom he dissolves himself in the four
directions and drowns himself in the unfathomable. To him
there is no east or west—he begins in the Dark Obscurity
and returns to the Great Thoroughfare. Now you come
niggling along and try to spy him out or fix some name to
him, but this is like using a tube to scan the sky or an awl to
measure the depth of the earth—the instrument is too
small, is it not? You’d better be on your way! Or perhaps
you’ve never heard about the young boy of Shouling who
went to learn the Handan Walk. He hadn’t mastered what the
Handan people had to teach him when he forgot his old way
of walking, so he had to crawl all the way back home. Now
if you don’t get on your way, you’re likely to forget what
you knew before and be out of a job!”
Gongsun Long’s mouth fell open and wouldn’t stay
closed. His tongue stuck to the roof of his mouth and
wouldn’t come down. In the end he broke into a run and
fled.
Once, when Zhuangzi was fishing in the Pu River, the king
of Chu sent two officials to go and announce to him: “I
would like to trouble you with the administration of my
realm.”
Zhuangzi held on to the fishing pole and, without turning
his head, said, “I have heard that there is a sacred tortoise in
Chu that has been dead for three thousand years. The king
keeps it wrapped in cloth and boxed, and stores it in the
ancestral temple. Now would this tortoise rather be dead
and have its bones left behind and honored? Or would it
rather be alive and dragging its tail in the mud?”
“It would rather be alive and dragging its tail in the mud,”
said the two officials.
Zhuangzi said, “Go away! I’ll drag my tail in the mud!”
When Huizi was prime minister of Liang, Zhuangzi set off
to visit him. Someone said to Huizi, “Zhuangzi is coming
because he wants to replace you as prime minister!” With
this, Huizi was filled with alarm and searched all over the
state for three days and three nights trying to find Zhuangzi.
Zhuangzi then came to see him and said, “In the south there
is a bird called the Yuanchu—I wonder if you’ve ever heard
of it? The Yuanchu rises up from the South Sea and flies to
the North Sea, and it will rest on nothing but the Wutong
tree, eat nothing but the fruit of the Lian, and drink only
from springs of sweet water. Once there was an owl who
had gotten hold of a half-rotten old rat, and as the Yuanchu
passed by, it raised its head, looked up at the Yuanchu, and
said, ‘Shoo!’ Now that you have this Liang state of yours,
are you trying to shoo me?”
Zhuangzi and Huizi were strolling along the dam of the Hao
River when Zhuangzi said, “See how the minnows come out
and dart around where they please! That’s what fish really
enjoy!”
Huizi said, “You’re not a fish—how do you know what
fish enjoy?”
Zhuangzi said, “You’re not I, so how do you know that I
don’t know what fish enjoy?”
Huizi said, “I’m not you, so I certainly don’t know what
you know. On the other hand, you’re certainly not a fish—
so that still proves that you don’t know what fish enjoy!”
Zhuangzi said, “Let’s go back to your original question,
please. You asked me how I know what fish enjoy—so you
already knew that I knew it when you asked the question. I
know it by standing here beside the Hao.”

